Hello and welcome to Linux Action News, our weekly take on Linux and the open source world.
This is episode 8, recorded on July 2nd, 2017, and I'm Chris.
And I'm Joe.
Hello Joe, we have a great lineup of news and finally some details on a story we covered
towards the very beginning of this show.
OpenSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise have hit the Windows Store, yeah I said the Windows
Store.
Yeah so the Windows subsystem for Linux is now not just Ubuntu officially, now you've
got OpenSUSE and SUSE Linux Enterprise, which totally makes sense doesn't it because this
is really aimed at developers and people and you know sysadmins and that kind of thing.
So you're going to expect it to be the more corporate distros, so I'm just waiting for
RHEL which we haven't got any word on yet.
Fedora is supposed to be coming soon, but I think it would make a lot of sense to get
well at least CentOS on there.
I was just thinking that, I wonder if the project could take that on or if Microsoft
could help them.
Definitely the SUSE Enterprise server is, that clicks for me, that makes a lot of sense
and you will need to be a member of the Windows Insider program to get this.
I think you have to be running preview build 16, 190 or later to get this.
And also just a caveat, I think this is a prop, maybe it will be fixed by the time this
episode goes out, but in the Windows Store there are screenshots of the X desktop for
SUSE.
Yeah which is confusing isn't it.
No you don't get that, you get bash when you install SUSE and you still also have to first
install the Linux subsystem, but you know a couple of quick things, you can sign up
for the Insider program pretty quickly and then you could match your production now on
your Windows 10 box, that's going to matter for a lot of people.
Yeah and you can of course hack it so you can install X server and stuff and make it
work but that's not officially supported.
Yeah well I suppose that would almost be worth me loading a Windows 10 machine just to mess
around with because I remember the days of Cygwin Joe and this is a whole other breed.
I actually am really impressed with what Microsoft is doing here and it's cool to see SUSE actually
get it in there.
I was a little surprised it took publishing to the Windows Store for us to really find
out what versions of SUSE we get to try, but now we know.
Yeah especially as I actually spoke to Richard about this, Richard Brown, the chairman of
OpenSUSE and still he didn't know and that was maybe three weeks ago, four weeks ago,
so I don't really understand why it's happened like this but well here we are, we've gotten
both so just wait for Fedora and maybe Arch at one point but I'm not holding my breath
for that.
I wouldn't hold my breath for Pop OS either, that's System76's new operating system, don't
call it a distribution, they announced it this week, Pop OS based on Ubuntu 17.04 using
the GNOME desktop environment.
You mean Pop exclamation mark underscore OS.
Yes I do, it's kind of hard to say that, I'm not sure and I'm not sure if the acronym is
supposed to be POS or if it's just POP, maybe it's just supposed to be POP, those are all
things we haven't learned yet because we're all too busy trying to figure out what just
happened.
Well I think there's quite a few people who think it's a POS but let's not go there, eh?
You know I've been trying to figure out how do people generally feel about this and I'm
honestly getting the sense from System76's own customer base, their existing base, they
seem kind of fired up about this.
Now people outside of that ecosystem seem to be extremely skeptical.
Yeah skeptical to say the least really, I've seen a lot of negativity on Reddit, in the
Telegram channels, it just seems that the wider community as you say are not, they just
keep asking the question why, you guys were talking about this on User Error and it just
keeps coming back to that question, why, why have they done this?
But I suppose yeah the only positivity I've seen is yeah from the existing System76 community
not from the wider Linux community because the wider community sees this as duplicated
effort because they've based it on Ubuntu and right now we've got this alpha which is
based on Ubuntu GNOME 17.04 and really apart from a theme and some extensions there's not
really much to differentiate it.
Yeah not yet, I would be interested to see if they eventually deviate in like release
cadence and pre-installed software more and more.
There's also the question if they're going to become an official Ubuntu flavor and I
think that's a pretty important question.
There's a big trademark issue lingering here now because they're using the Ubuntu repos
and a lot of the software packages that are being installed have Ubuntu in the name, Ubuntu
in some of the build notes, that could lead to a potential trademark issue, something
that Mint is somewhat familiar with especially because they'll be using the same repos where
if they become a flavor it essentially resolves these issues plus they get popped into the
support infrastructure for the other Ubuntu flavors.
But it's not clear to me exactly what restrictions would be placed on them by becoming an official
flavor.
Well I think that that is la la land dream thinking really, it's not going to happen.
I can't see that Canonical would be willing to even entertain the idea because it's too
similar.
All of the other flavors have something that differentiates them whether it's an XFCE or
Marte desktop or whatever but if you've just got a GNOME desktop with a different theme,
how is that different enough to warrant it being a flavor?
There just seems no way that that's going to happen to me.
To tell you the truth Joe, if I was Carl at System76 I'd probably be willing to make some
concessions to become an official flavor.
If they don't, they're going to end up in a situation I believe where they're going
to have to offer both OS choices at purchase time, Ubuntu LTS or Pop OS.
The people buying System76 hardware are buying it because it runs Ubuntu really well.
So they either have to be really close in that Ubuntu lineage or they're going to have
to offer Ubuntu proper.
Well yeah but as long as Ubuntu works on it because the big question I have here and I
am not over in the States so I don't really know many people who've got System76 machines
but if I bought one, the first thing I would do is wipe it and put Ubuntu on there and
a lot of people would put Arch or Fedora or whatever because if it works really well with
Ubuntu then the chances are it's going to work with the other.
Exactly, that is almost universally true with some caveats.
System76 bundles a PPA with their machines and that PPA includes fixes and drivers that
often make a system run better and there is some ways to get it on Arch.
I think there's something in the AUR for it.
But if you've got a different Ubuntu flavor like Zubuntu is what I would use then I presume
I could add that PPA manually.
Sure you could but then I think you're beginning to fall outside the spectrum of System76 customer.
Not fully outside of it.
Well that's the question.
That's the question.
Am I outside of that or not?
How many of their customers really wipe it and you can pay as soon as they get it?
From my conversations with both System76 and Dell they are under the impression, probably
based on support calls, that the vast majority leave the stock install and surprising that
both vendors said that to me when I asked them that question.
Because Joe I was thinking the same thing, like that's what I do, I usually put something
else on there.
But they, at least in the terms of their support data show, that customers run what they ship.
Well that would be consistent with basically any other hardware that comes with any operating
system be it phones or computers.
People who buy a Windows machine they think it's broken because Windows is so slow.
They don't even want to use the recovery partition, they don't even know there's a recovery partition.
So people just want an appliance.
But I just can't help but think that the kind of person who would buy a Linux machine would
have a different mindset.
But maybe I'm wrong.
It might matter more in the future because this hardware is getting more sophisticated,
more advanced, it has more specialized features in it like super high resolution screens,
crazy great trackpads.
Perhaps in the future it might have dual batteries and integrated LTE modems, I'm thinking of
the Galago Pro.
And these types of features might require more and more System76's modifications.
So you combine that with user application feedback they're getting from their customer.
Future hardware designs that they perhaps have on the roadmap that have more sophistication
than ever, they might have just arrived at a place where they said, we're going to have
to modify Ubuntu so much to make it work with our stuff that we should really just call
it our own OS.
And that might be something that's really a 2018 reality, but they've got to start the
work in 2017.
Well yeah, and also they're kind of almost going for this Apple approach, aren't they?
In theory of control the hardware and the software, and then you're going to have a
great experience.
Yeah, and it does seem like if anybody was going to be able to integrate hardware and
software it would be a hardware vendor who's got a lot of experience tweaking the end result.
Now here's where I play a little devil's advocate.
At the same time System76 is trying to spin up a massive manufacturing effort, which is
brand new to their company, they're also going to spin up an operating system?
Don't call it a distribution.
And they're making it available to the general public.
So it's not just an OS for their hardware, but it's an OS for quote-unquote creators.
This is two unbelievable, massive endeavors that I can't really think of any other companies
besides one or two that have really pulled this off.
One thing I heard you say on User Error was that if they don't do this right, then it
could be the beginning of the end for them.
And then you kind of got sidetracked, and I'm really keen to know where you were going
with that.
It would really be the unfortunate combination of a series of events, delays in the hardware
manufacturing process, so they have to continue to ship ODM hardware where they have to make
compromises they're not happy with, and then an OS that isn't well received by the community
that doesn't gain a lot of brand traction, sorry to use these terms, but if it doesn't
gain a lot of brand traction, they're going to be delivering slightly underwhelming hardware
with an OS that nobody's really heard of, and that's a super marginalized position to
be in.
But it's also at the same time, if it's successful, would be a really great position to be in.
So I can see their bold logic here.
It's just extremely bold, and I have to be honest with you, the kind of improvement I
would have liked to have seen as an 11-year customer of 76 are things that make using
the machines long term even better.
I'll give you a number one example.
With the XPS line and a few others, Dell has now managed to ship firmware updates via GNOME
Software Center, integrated right in with my Linux desktop.
No more need for FreeDOS or booting into Windows to fix microcode issues.
It's just right there in GNOME Software Center.
It feels like an Apple-level integrated experience.
I would love to see work done on that.
I would love to see pressure applied to the upstream ODM.
These kinds of things would have been more direct, real changes that would improve the
existing immediate product line that would make me want to buy another computer in the
short term.
As it is right now, maybe I'm waiting until 2019, 2020 before I'm going to take another
look at a System76 machine, simply because now I'm going to want to wait to see where
their hardware manufacturing goes and where Pop!
OS goes.
And it's going to take a few years for everything to mature.
Yeah, I think that's all fair, but have you had a look at this yet?
At Pop!
OS?
Yeah.
Yeah, just a bit.
I tossed it in a VM yesterday.
It's quite pretty, isn't it?
It's a little loud.
I find it to be a bit distracting, so I generally go with a more low-key icon theme.
But other than that, yeah, it's actually not bad.
And what I really like is how they're working to take that theme and extend it to other
applications like Telegram and maybe Slack to really make it all feel like it's one desktop.
Yeah, and the extensions that they've chosen to use, I think, are ones that I would if
I was forced to use GNOME.
So it makes it more usable than the kind of stock of Ubuntu GNOME.
So yeah, I think they're going in the right direction with it, but we've just got to see
what the community pushback is going to be, because we're actually going to get a release,
aren't we, around the same time as 17.10 comes out in October.
Yeah.
So, yeah, we'll have to see how good that is.
I could see it working out.
If the community got behind it, if they could work with Canonical, become an official flavor,
and they had the internal resources to pull it off, it could be one of the more interesting
flavors of the Ubuntu desktop.
Well, we'll see.
We'll see.
Well, speaking of the Ubuntu desktop, Will Cook has posted about easing the migration
of Unity 7 users to GNOME Shell.
Yeah, we mentioned last week they're separating out the Ubuntu desktop session and the Unity
session so you can have the new GNOME desktop and Unity 7 side by side.
They've also done some work to improve the desktop launchers to make use of the new GNOME
platform snap support, which is actually kind of neat.
So they're going to have like full-fledged fancy snap support in GNOME software, which
is going upstream.
And they're continuing work on the live patch service that we've been talking about recently
to integrate it into the Ubuntu desktop.
And now it looks like the Update Manager utility is capable of displaying the current live
patch status as well as the fixes that are available for installation or those that have
already been applied.
And they're working on a prototype API that will just go fetch the latest information
from the CVE database.
So much for people like me saying that they were totally abandoning the desktop and not
working on it anymore, eh?
Yeah, that's a really nice feature to put in your desktop Update Manager, and it's probably
going to spur a lot of adoption of the live patch service.
Yeah, and it's good to see that this stuff is getting pushed upstream as well.
So what we kind of speculated about that it was going to be good for GNOME as a whole
seems to be coming true already, and we haven't even seen a proper release yet.
Linux Academy dot com slash unplugged.
Go there to sign up for a free seven-day trial and support the show for a platform that has
everything you need to learn and get hands-on experience with Linux topics from the really
low-level stuff all the way up to the cloud stuff like Azure and AWS and OpenStack.
You know, actually, if you need to learn AWS, from my personal experience, I will recommend
Linux Academy.
This was a game changer for me because when I started with trying to learn AWS, I burned
through hours and hours of CPU time.
With Linux Academy, they spin up the systems as you need them on demand.
They have hands-on scenario-based labs that give you real experience and instructor mentoring
when you need it, as well as a core scheduler that works with your busy schedule.
Linux Academy dot com slash unplugged.
So back when Canonical dropped the bombshell that they were killing convergence and Unity
and all that stuff, we had assumed that Mir was going to be the number one casualty of
that because why do they need Mir anymore if they're going to go to Wayland on GNOME
and they're not going to work on the phones anymore?
Well, it seems that we were wrong about that because they're heading towards Mir 1.0 release,
which is actually going to support Wayland.
Yeah, it was just a flesh wound, Joe.
I did a little digging before the show and it looks like patches have been applied since
the announcements, after the announcements, and it looks like, according to Alan, who's
one of the long, not Alan Jude, but Alan Griffiths, one of the longtime Mir developers, says that
Mir 0.27 is coming soon with a lot of work in progress features that were baking prior
to Canonical shifting their desktop focus.
They're also talking about adding Wayland support, like you were saying, and this could
be huge for different desktops because Mir might just be about to become a compositor
that speaks Wayland.
Yeah, and that means that potentially Marte might be able to take advantage of that and
not have to either roll their own or rely on mutter.
If this sounds a little crazy, well, these are the kind of things that open source enthusiasts
come up with when they're all together in the same room.
They've been at a Snappy Sprint in Canonical's London office and they've been chatting about
Flatpak and Snap integrations with existing GNOME software and stuff, but this came up
on the sidelines and the idea really here was it would take less work to add Wayland
support to Mir than it would to move Mate over to mutter or to build Wayland support
into Marco, its compositor.
To be honest, this has sort of been coming for a little while.
They first moved over to GTK3, but after that, what comes next?
High DPI came, then it becomes Wayland support time.
This is really where they're up against a wall, and Wimpy says it perfectly.
Mr. Wimpris says that, Mate is a very small team with extremely constrained time.
Implementing Wayland directly is at our current development velocity several years away in
his opinion.
He then goes on to say, Mir could provide us a fast path to supporting Wayland.
We should explore it and possibly other desktops without Wayland support as well, like maybe
Joe's beloved XFCE.
Well, whatever makes it work.
The last thing I expected to come to XFCE's rescue is Mir, but yeah, if it happens, it
happens great.
If it means that XFCE can stay relevant and use modern technology, then I'm well up for
it.
I want to be clear about this point because I've read a lot of negative feedback about
this story on the internet already.
If we blow this as a community, we are guaranteed in for a bumpy ride with the transition to
Wayland.
Unless some display server magician shows up and writes magic code for every open source
desktop that crops up under the sun that's going to need to speak Wayland, unless that
happens, we're either going to have a massive consolidation of desktops once everybody switches
over to Wayland, and it's only going to be the top projects that can make it work, or
we need a common API for all these other projects to take advantage of, like Mir, that can do
the hard, heavy lifting of talking to Wayland and then provide them a versioned API set
that they can just write their desktop to.
But do you think that there's going to be a bit of pushback against it?
There already is.
Well, do you think it's going to be continued because it's a canonical, not invented here
type deal?
Yes, definitely.
Canonical could make things easier on themselves by putting everything on GitHub, by taking
Launchpad out of it.
I don't know if that's a reality, I don't know if that's possible.
And also, that CLA has to be taken out of the picture as well for people to really double
down on this.
Maybe that can happen.
Maybe it mostly already has.
I don't know, Canonical seem to love the CLA though, don't they?
Well, it just makes things easier if you want to relicense and stuff.
Yeah, you're absolutely right.
However, if you read Alan's blog, they talk about refocusing the project for quote unquote
Ubuntu core and separating the Android stuff out as its own project.
That might be lining it up for something like pulling out the CLA, putting it up on GitHub.
I'm not convinced, really.
I hope so.
I hope it happens, but I just don't think it will.
Yes, I am being optimistic.
I'm hopeful that we can pull this off.
Or we have a bunch of magic coders that show up all of a sudden and can write perfect compositors
for all these open source desktops.
Yeah, I think we should have seen this coming though, because more or less straight away
after they made the announcement, they said that they were going to continue MIR for the
IoT stuff, and where the IoT needs a display, then it just makes sense that you're going
to have MIR and Wayland.
Yeah, so I think the takeaway from this story, if you hear this floating around on the internet,
this isn't a Wayland competitor.
This is about making MIR work with Wayland.
Yeah, it's about them actually using a standard for once rather than completely writing their
own.
Yeah.
Speaking of going at their own, Intel has a bit of a bug in their Skylake and Kabylake
six and seventh gen CPUs.
Yeah, one of which I've got in this laptop that I'm using to speak to you now.
Yeah, I think I've got one in one of my machines too.
Watch out, Joe, it could dangerously misbehave.
Well, it hasn't yet, and I only installed the microcode fix today, and I've not had
any problems.
I think that this has been a little bit overblown.
This actually came out around the time we recorded this time last week, but we didn't
cover it because the details were a bit sketchy at that point.
But now after a week to digest it, I think that it's been a little bit overblown really,
because I think it's a very specific set of circumstances that are going to trigger this
bug.
Yeah, not only is it certain circumstances, but they have to be under complex microarchitectural
conditions as Intel puts it, where this bug can only happen if both the logical processor
on the same physical processors are active.
Whatever that means, it's their way of trying to say, it's really hard to pull this off.
And I buy it, because honestly, some of these products have been in the market for a couple
of years now, and we're just now coming across this.
There's an interesting conundrum here, though, because a lot of Linux advocates, a lot of
open source advocates out there are now all of a sudden in a position where they kind
of need that nasty microcode.
That's what I find fascinating about this story.
Yeah, and if you're running a pragmatic distro like Ubuntu, for example, it's very easy to
get this microcode and run it at boot, and then you don't have to go into your BIOS or
EFI and disable hyper-threading, which, well, that's the question for you.
Did you disable hyper-threading when you heard about this, or did you just risk it?
No.
Yeah, I'm going to risk it, Joe.
I'm just going to go for it.
And then what I think I'll do is in a few weeks, I'll check in on my motherboard's website
and vendor's website and see if they have a BIOS update for my system, and I'll probably
fix it that way.
Yeah.
And I'm not hugely happy about running proprietary code, but I thought I'd better do it anyway
just to be safe.
But the problem with Debian, and that's why it came out of Debian that we realized this
was a problem, is that Debian is not, they're not very happy about shipping proprietary
code, are they?
And they're not happy about facilitating it.
The microcode is not installed by default on a Debian installation either.
It's in the repo, but it's not by default.
Yeah, and it's not only Linux users who are affected by this.
It's a hardware problem, so it's not exclusive to the Linux community.
You could be forgiven for seeing it that way because it's associated with Debian.
People first thought it was just a Debian problem, then, oh, it's a Linux problem.
Well, no, hang on.
This has been a problem for Windows and Mac OS as well, and presumably BSD even.
I got a little spooked when I started reading deeper and deeper into this story and started
hearing from people that used to work at Intel, and they said, you have no idea.
There are so many bugs in these CPUs now because they're so complex.
What you hear about is just the tip of the iceberg, and I'm like, okay, that's going
to make me neurotic.
If I go any further, I'm going to stop right there.
Yeah, not to mention the potential back doors and stuff.
Yeah, it's not a pretty picture, but it's what we have for today at least.
You know, I probably will update just because I run my recording systems with these processors,
and I want to do everything I can to make them as stable as possible.
And thankfully, microcode package updates are available for Linux.
If you're on Windows 10, you're going to be waiting a little bit.
Yeah, hang on.
So you want it to be as stable as possible, and you're still using GNOME?
Your face, Joe, your face.
I did some updates, and so far, at least it isn't crashing three times a day anymore.
I am still going to move off.
I've actually decided, I think after my conversation with Dustin, I think I'm going to do Ubuntu
16.04 LTS with Livepatch on the broadcast machine.
Now it's just waiting for me to get off my butt and reload that system.
But it's such a tight Jack Bauer window I have to work in, because there's only so much
time before we're live again.
So you've got to reload the system and not miss any of your broadcast config.
Is 16.04 going to be new enough for you to get the software you need though, the versions?
I hadn't really checked yet, so it's something I've got to look into.
Before I even do it, I would set up a whole other rig and try it all there, and validate
the config before I actually put it in production.
So I don't know.
I'm hopeful.
I hear there's these wonderful things called PPAs.
So I was going to say, you love a PPA, not.
Maybe I can get a flat pack.
Maybe even a snap.
Yeah.
You never know.
I'd take it actually.
Could be a good way to distribute OBS.
Are you listening, OBS Project?
Make it happen.
All right.
Well, that brings us to the end of this week's episode.
You can check out linuxactionnews.com slash subscribe for all the ways to get new episodes.
And linuxactionnews.com slash contact for all the ways to get in touch.
Yeah.
We'll be back next Monday with our weekly take on the latest Linux and open source news.
I'm at Chris LAS.
I'm at Joe Rissington.
Thanks for joining us, and we'll see you next week.
See you later.